.\" Manpage for sqlt.
.\" Keep in sync with src/cli/mod.rs (clap doc comments and *_LONG_ABOUT),
.\" src/cli/examples.rs (the --examples constants), README.md, and
.\" CHANGELOG.md whenever any user-visible behaviour changes.
.TH SQLT 1 "2026-05-19" "sqlt 0.3.3" "User Commands"
.SH NAME
sqlt \- multi-dialect SQL parser, translator, and linter
.SH SYNOPSIS
.B sqlt
[\fB\-\-examples\fR] [\fB\-\-help\fR] [\fB\-\-version\fR]
.br
.B sqlt parse
\fB\-\-from\fR \fIDIALECT\fR [\fB\-\-pretty\fR] [\fB\-e\fR \fIENC\fR] [\fIFILE\fR|\fB\-\fR]
.br
.B sqlt emit
[\fB\-\-to\fR \fIDIALECT\fR] [\fB\-e\fR \fIENC\fR] [\fIFILE\fR|\fB\-\fR]
.br
.B sqlt translate
\fB\-\-from\fR \fISRC\fR \fB\-\-to\fR \fIDST\fR [\fB\-\-strict\fR] [\fB\-e\fR \fIENC\fR] [\fIFILE\fR|\fB\-\fR]
.br
.B sqlt lint
\fB\-\-from\fR \fISRC\fR [\fB\-\-to\fR \fIDST\fR] [\fB\-\-format\fR \fIFMT\fR]
[\fB\-\-rule\fR \fIID\fR]... [\fB\-\-no\-rule\fR \fIID\fR]...
[\fB\-\-severity\fR \fILVL\fR] [\fB\-\-exit\-on\fR \fILVL\fR]
[\fB\-\-help\-mode\fR \fIMODE\fR | \fB\-\-no\-help\fR]
[\fB\-\-schema\fR \fIFILE\fR]... [\fB\-\-verbose\fR] [\fB\-e\fR \fIENC\fR] [\fIFILE\fR|\fB\-\fR]
.br
.B sqlt lint
\fB\-\-explain\fR \fIID\fR
.br
.B sqlt lint
\fB\-\-list\-rules\fR
.br
.B sqlt build-schema
\fB\-\-from\fR \fIDIALECT\fR \fB\-\-schema\fR \fIFILE\fR... [\fB\-o\fR \fIPATH\fR] [\fB\-\-pretty\fR] [\fB\-e\fR \fIENC\fR]
.SH DESCRIPTION
.B sqlt
parses SQL written in any of the supported dialects into a JSON AST
envelope, emits SQL back from that envelope, translates between dialects
via the AST, and lints SQL for portability, performance, and correctness
pitfalls.
.PP
Each subcommand reads input from a positional \fIFILE\fR argument or
from stdin when \fIFILE\fR is omitted or given as \fB\-\fR. All JSON I/O
is UTF-8 per the JSON spec; the \fB\-\-encoding\fR flag governs only the
SQL byte encoding.
.PP
MariaDB is treated as a first-class target distinct from MySQL.
\fImariadb-dump\fR-only constructs (\fI/*!NNN ... */\fR conditional
comments, \fBDELIMITER\fR directives, system versioning, \fBCREATE
PACKAGE\fR, \fBCREATE SEQUENCE\fR, \fBFOR SYSTEM_TIME\fR, optimization
hints, \fBDEFINER\fR clauses) are recognised, preprocessed, and either
parsed or wrapped as \fIRaw\fR fragments rather than silently rejected.
.SH COMMANDS
.TP
.B parse
SQL \[->] JSON AST. Reads SQL with \fB\-\-from\fR \fIDIALECT\fR and emits
a JSON envelope \fB{ sqlt_version, dialect, statements }\fR. Use
\fB\-\-pretty\fR for indented JSON. See \fBsqlt parse \-\-examples\fR.
.TP
.B emit
JSON AST \[->] SQL. Reads the envelope produced by \fBsqlt parse\fR and
writes SQL via the sqlparser \fIDisplay\fR impl. \fB\-\-to\fR overrides
the dialect recorded in the envelope. See \fBsqlt emit \-\-examples\fR.
.TP
.B translate
SQL \[->] SQL via AST. Parses with \fB\-\-from\fR, runs the per-dialect
rewriter that converts source-only constructs to target equivalents (or
warns when no equivalent exists), and emits SQL in \fB\-\-to\fR.
Warnings go to stderr; \fB\-\-strict\fR turns any warning into exit code
3. See \fBsqlt translate \-\-examples\fR.
.TP
.B lint
Analyzes SQL for pitfalls and improvement suggestions. Runs a curated
ruleset (\(ti38 rules across 8 categories) over the parsed AST. Output
formats: \fBtext\fR (default), \fBpretty\fR, \fBjson\fR, \fBsarif\fR.
\fB\-\-explain\fR \fIID\fR and \fB\-\-list\-rules\fR document the ruleset
offline. See \fBsqlt lint \-\-examples\fR.
.TP
.B build-schema
Compiles one or more \fB\-\-schema\fR files (CREATE/ALTER/DROP TABLE,
CREATE INDEX, foreign-key constraints, USE/CREATE DATABASE) into a
reusable JSON artifact. \fBsqlt lint \-\-schema\fR \fIartifact.json\fR
reloads the compiled state without re-parsing the migration history. See
\fBsqlt build-schema \-\-examples\fR.
.SH DIALECTS
Accepted values for \fB\-\-from\fR and \fB\-\-to\fR:
.TP
\fBmysql\fR
MySQL 5.7+ / 8.0.
.TP
\fBmariadb\fR (alias \fBmaria\fR)
MariaDB \(em first-class target.
.TP
\fBpostgres\fR (aliases \fBpostgresql\fR, \fBpg\fR)
PostgreSQL.
.TP
\fBmssql\fR (aliases \fBtsql\fR, \fBsqlserver\fR)
Microsoft SQL Server (T-SQL).
.TP
\fBsqlite\fR
SQLite.
.TP
\fBgeneric\fR
Permissive fallback dialect.
.SH ENCODINGS
Accepted values for \fB\-\-encoding\fR / \fB\-e\fR:
.TP
\fButf\-8\fR
Default. Always used for JSON I/O.
.TP
\fBiso\-8859\-1\fR (alias \fBlatin1\fR)
Latin-1 / ISO-8859-1 8-bit code page.
.TP
\fBwindows\-1252\fR (alias \fBcp1252\fR)
Windows-1252 (Latin-1 superset).
.PP
Decoding is strict \(em invalid byte sequences are rejected with exit
code 1, never silently substituted with U+FFFD.
.SH "LINT RULE CATEGORIES"
.TP
\fBraw\fR \(em SQLT00xx
Raw passthrough (off by default; see \fB\-v\fR).
.TP
\fBdialect\-xc\fR \(em SQLT01xx
Dialect cross-contamination (e.g. backtick in postgres).
.TP
\fBpre\-flight\fR \(em SQLT02xx
Translation pre-flight (only when \fB\-\-to\fR is set).
.TP
\fBjoins\fR \(em SQLT03xx
Implicit cross joins, NATURAL JOIN, ON 1=1.
.TP
\fBsubquery\fR \(em SQLT04xx
IN (SELECT) \[->] EXISTS, correlated subqueries.
.TP
\fBperf\fR \(em SQLT05xx
SELECT *, leading-wildcard LIKE, function-on-column.
.TP
\fBcorrectness\fR \(em SQLT06xx
= NULL, UPDATE/DELETE without WHERE.
.TP
\fBstyle\fR \(em SQLT07xx
Unaliased derived tables, LIMIT without ORDER BY.
.TP
\fBddl\fR \(em SQLT08xx
Float-for-money, VARCHAR without length.
.PP
\fB\-\-rule\fR \fIID\fR and \fB\-\-no\-rule\fR \fIID\fR accept the full
id (\fBSQLT0500\fR), short numeric (\fB0500\fR / \fB500\fR), or slug
(\fBselect\-star\fR). \fB\-\-explain\fR \fIID\fR prints a rule's summary,
long-form explanation, default severity, and default-enabled state.
.SH "TRANSLATION WARNINGS"
Stable codes emitted on stderr by \fBsqlt translate\fR:
.TP
\fBRETURNING_DROPPED\fR
Target dialect lacks RETURNING.
.TP
\fBSEQUENCE_DROPPED\fR
Target dialect lacks CREATE SEQUENCE.
.TP
\fBON_DUPLICATE_KEY_UNSUPPORTED\fR
Target dialect lacks ON DUPLICATE KEY UPDATE.
.TP
\fBRAW_PASSTHROUGH\fR
Source had a Raw fragment with no faithful target equivalent.
.PP
Use \fB\-\-strict\fR to make any warning a non-zero exit (code 3).
.SH EXAMPLES
.PP
Parse SQL \[->] JSON AST:
.PP
.RS 4
.nf
echo "SELECT 1" | sqlt parse \-\-from mysql \-\-pretty
.fi
.RE
.PP
Emit JSON AST \[->] SQL:
.PP
.RS 4
.nf
sqlt parse \-\-from postgres schema.sql | sqlt emit \-\-to mysql
.fi
.RE
.PP
Translate between dialects:
.PP
.RS 4
.nf
sqlt translate \-\-from mariadb \-\-to postgres input.sql
.fi
.RE
.PP
Strict translation (fail the build on any warning):
.PP
.RS 4
.nf
sqlt translate \-\-from mariadb \-\-to mysql \-\-strict schema.sql
.fi
.RE
.PP
Lint a MariaDB schema (Latin-1):
.PP
.RS 4
.nf
sqlt lint \-\-from mariadb \-e iso\-8859\-1 schema.sql
.fi
.RE
.PP
Lint with translation pre-flight against Postgres:
.PP
.RS 4
.nf
sqlt lint \-\-from mariadb \-\-to postgres schema.sql
.fi
.RE
.PP
JSON output for tooling:
.PP
.RS 4
.nf
sqlt lint \-\-from mariadb \-\-format json schema.sql > findings.json
.fi
.RE
.PP
SARIF for GitHub code-scanning:
.PP
.RS 4
.nf
sqlt lint \-\-from mariadb \-\-format sarif schema.sql > out.sarif
.fi
.RE
.PP
Compile a migration history once, lint against it on every PR:
.PP
.RS 4
.nf
sqlt build-schema \-\-from mariadb \\
    \-\-schema shop/bootstrap.sql \-\-schema shop/migrations/*.sql \\
    \-o shop_schema.json
sqlt lint \-\-from mariadb \-\-schema shop_schema.json query.sql
.fi
.RE
.PP
Documentation discoverability:
.PP
.RS 4
.nf
sqlt lint \-\-list\-rules                  # full ruleset
sqlt lint \-\-explain SQLT0801             # one rule
sqlt <command> \-\-examples                # in-depth examples
sqlt \-\-examples                          # cross-cutting overview
.fi
.RE
.SH "EXIT STATUS"
.TP
.B 0
Clean run.
.TP
.B 1
Parse error, encoding error, I/O error, or lint findings \(>= \fB\-\-exit\-on\fR threshold.
.TP
.B 2
Usage error (unknown dialect, unknown rule, bad flag combination).
.TP
.B 3
.B sqlt translate \-\-strict
saw at least one warning.
.SH FILES
Input is read from a positional path or from stdin (omit the path or
pass \fB\-\fR). \fBsqlt build-schema \-\-output\fR \fIPATH\fR writes the
JSON artifact; \fBsqlt lint \-\-schema\fR \fIPATH\fR accepts both
\fI.sql\fR and \fI.json\fR artifacts.
.SH ENVIRONMENT
.TP
.B NO_COLOR
When set (any value), disables ANSI colour in \fB\-\-examples\fR and
lint output.
.TP
.B CLICOLOR_FORCE
When set, forces ANSI colour even when stdout is not a TTY.
.SH "SEE ALSO"
.PP
\fBsqlt \-\-examples\fR, \fBsqlt \fIcommand\fB \-\-help\fR, \fBsqlt
\fIcommand\fB \-\-examples\fR.
.PP
Project README and CHANGELOG ship with the source distribution; the
canonical repository is
.UR https://github.com/codedeviate/sqlt
.UE .
.SH BUGS
Report bugs at
.UR https://github.com/codedeviate/sqlt/issues
.UE .
.SH AUTHOR
codedeviate <codedv8@gmail.com>
